Add Spanish translations blog post (#31)
knpuniversity/blog: spanish-translations.md

subtitles file look like:

```
WEBVTT

00:00:01.056 --> 00:00:04.996 align:middle
Rendering a template is pretty common, so
there's a shortcut when you're in a controller.

00:00:05.966 --> 00:00:09.976 align:middle
Replace all of this code with a
simple return $this->render:
```

But this turned out to be a problem because we generate the Spanish translations from the 
output of an AI algorithm, which sometimes translates the script and subtitles 
content *slightly* differently. These slight differences break the script script-clicking feature! 
Fortunately, this is rare. And if the script-clicking feature fails on the translated content, 
we send an alert to one of the trusty folks at SymfonyCasts to fix it.

## The `StofDoctrineExtensionsBundle` comes in to play

It's one thing to accurately translate a tutorial, but delivering a multi-language site is quite...
a different thing to do. As you may have noticed, we partially translated the site
into Spanish: you will see Spanish content only on tutorials that are translated. For this
purpose we installed and configured the `StofDoctrineExtensionsBundle` in the application. 

> You can learn more about the _translatable_ behavior [here](https://github.com/doctrine-extensions/DoctrineExtensions/blob/main/doc/translatable.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about the _translatable_ behavior [here](https://github.com/doctrine-extensions/DoctrineExtensions/blob/main/doc/translatable.md).
```

# Automatic Spanish Translations

> We're happy to announce that from now on we'll deliver Spanish translations to our

Author: Well, we also translate non-new tutorials. We translate the most watched tutorials too

> We're happy to announce that from now on we'll deliver Spanish translations to our

Reviewer: Better to say new and then over-deliver than "omit" this word and under-deliver in the eyes of some people :)

> tutorials (script and subtitles). How we made this possible? You may think that

Reviewer: Add another sentence with a link to a Spanish page to see an example. And probably we should mention *how* to switch to Spanish - perhaps that could be the image of the post (showing... maybe a video player with the captions drop down expanded or some other "Spanish" link from somewhere on the site)?

Also, I think you're under-selling it! This includes the ability to click any spanish sentence in the script and jump to that part of the video, just like English.

Author: I didn't add a section showing how to change language, I think that's intuitive but let me know if you think otherwise

> tutorials (script and subtitles). How we made this possible? You may think that

Reviewer: > You might think that

> we hired a professional who takes care of translating the content, well, let me

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we hired a professional who takes care of translating the content. As great as human beings, I'm proud
to say that you would be wrong!
```

proudly say that you're wrong. As programmers, we love to automate processes, so, that's

> exactly what we did. We leverage the powerful translations service of *DeepL*. DeepL is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exactly what we did! We leverage the powerful translations service of *DeepL*, which is
```

> a translating cloud service based on an AI algorithm which is surprisingly good. But, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a translation service based on an AI algorithm. And... it's surprisingly good! But, 
```

this time it wasn't as easy as making an API call, we had to heavily customize our 
content so it supports our custom MarkDown syntax and keeping the translations as 

> accurate as possible.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that we're using StofDoctrineExtensionsBundle behind the scene? :)

Author: I think that goes beyond the scope of this blog post

Reviewer: I think it would be cool to share extra technical details in this post. For example, what does it look like when we make the API request to deepl? What settings do we use? How do we manage to translate the text, but not our code blocks? And, once we have a translated script, how do we get back to having translated subtitles? Also, there is our custom "glossary" that we've built. Basically, I think we could extend this post and make it even more interesting.

> Since this is a process run by machines, it's likely that you'll notice "details"

Reviewer 2: "misprints" maybe instead of "details"?

Reviewer: Yea, maybe:

> you'll notice some "misprints" or just... silly translations. Machines haven't *quite* taken over the world yet.
> But that's ok because we've also delivered...

> in our translations. So, that's why we also delivered a way where you can easily submit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in our translations. So, that's why we hosted translations in public GitHub repositories and also delivered a way where you can easily submit
```

a fix by sending a pull request. You only need to click on the "Edit on GitHub" button 
which is at the right top corner of the script area, edit the script (or caption) file

> and commit the changes.

Reviewer: I didn't realize it was that simple! Would we, at the moment, manually "transfer" those changes from the `.md` file to the `.vtt` file?

Author: If the user didn't modify both files, then, yes, we would have to apply manually the changes to the `.vtt` file

> Thank you for reading, and I hope you will find this helpful.

Reviewer: Probably we should mention other languages. Something like:

> Right now, we're focused only on translating content into Spanish, but we may expand in the future to other languages.

# Automatic Spanish Translations

We're happy to announce that from now on we'll deliver Spanish translations to our new

> tutorials (scripts and subtitles). How did we make this possible? You might think that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tutorials (scripts and subtitles)... pretty much instantly.  How did we make this possible? You might think that
```

> we hired a professional who takes care of translating the content. As great as human beings, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we hired a professional who takes care of translating the content. As lovely as humans are, 
```

> I'm proud to say that you would be wrong! As programmers, we love to automate processes, so, that's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we did *not* do this! As programmers, we love to automate processes, so, that's
```

> exactly what we did! We leverage the powerful translations service of *DeepL*, which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exactly what we did! We leverage *DeepL*: a powerful translation service based on an AI algorithm.
```

a translation service based on an AI algorithm. And... it's surprisingly good! But, 

> this time it wasn't as easy as making an API call, we had to heavily customize our 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this time it wasn't as easy as making an API call. Nope, we had to heavily customize our 
```

> content so that some technical words or code blocks won't get translated and also keep

Reviewer: ```suggestion
content so that technical words and code blocks are *not* translated. We also need to help Deepl
understand some of our technical language.
```

the translation as accurate as possible. 

## DeepL API

> DeepL allows you to wrap your content with XML tags to give it a special meaning, for example, 

Reviewer: Maybe we can start this section with a short tutorial example - e.g.:

To understand the challenge, let's look at an example from our Doctrine tutorial:

```
For example, one command is called `doctrine:database:create`. Cool, let's try it: 

'''terminal
php bin/console doctrine:database:create
'''
```

Hmm. We want Deeply to translate the first two sentences, but *not* the technical word `doctrine:database:create`. We also want it to skip the `terminal` block entirely... and to just return it "verbatim" in the correct position. See, tricky!

you can wrap a word with an "ignore" tag in case you don't want it to be translated, or, you can 
wrap a few text lines with a "non-splitting" tag to handle them as part of the 

> same sentence (useful for not loosing context on the subtitles). For this purpose we had to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
same sentence (useful for not losing context on the subtitles). For this purpose, we had to 
```

> implement a custom Markdown parser that converts MD tags into specific XML tags, so for example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implement a custom Markdown parser that converts MD tags into specific XML tags. For example,
```

> an inlined code block `$blocks = []` is parsed into `<dp-ignore>$blocks = []</dp-ignore>`. If you got

Reviewer: You could now use the literal `doctrine:databse:create` from the above example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an inlined code block `$blocks = []` is parsed into `<dp-ignore>$blocks = []</dp-ignore>`. If you're curious,
```

curious, DeepL has an API [simulator](https://www.deepl.com/es/docs-api/simulator/) where you can see all of its features. 
We got to use them all!

> By the way, this is how the API call to translate a script file looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the way, this is what the API call to translate a script file looks like:
```

Reviewer: Probably we should mention/link to the GitHub package we're using.

Also, I think we need a few more details here - we might need to show the entire class (even if shortened). Specifically, I want to show what `$this->deepl` is and also an example of what those two static methods return.

```php
public function translate(string $text, string $glossaryId = null): string
{
    $response = $this->deepL->translate(
        $text,
        Locale::LOCALE_DEFAULT, // source language
        Locale::LOCALE_SPANISH, // target language
        'xml', // tag handling
        static::getIgnoredTags(),
        'less', // formality
        'nonewlines', // split sentences
        1, // preserver formatting
        static::getNonSplittingTags(),
        static::getSplittingTags(),
        $glossaryId
    );

    return $response[0]['text'];
}
```

After translating the content we run a sort of inverse process for restoring the 
XML tags into Markdown, besides fixing a few flaws that comes from DeepL.

## DeepL Glossaries

The API also comes with a glossary where you can define a set of words that you want to translate

> in a particular way. In our case, is very useful for not translating library names. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a particular way. This is very useful, for example, to avoid translating library names. 
```

> Fun fact: _Twig_ translates into _Ramita_!

Author: I prefer the simple present tense

> Fun fact: _Twig_ translates into _Ramita_!

Reviewer 2: @larzuk91 it's the same simple present tense, but passive only. Because right now I'm not sure it's grammatically correct... you're saying like the Twig do an action, i.e. "translate" something, but here we mean that the "Twig" is translated by something else (by DeepL translator) and so should be used in passive form because Twig does not perform the action directly, the action is performed on Twig

> Fun fact: _Twig_ translates into _Ramita_!

Author: Ohh interesting. I need to go back to the English school 😅

## Script-clicking Feature

> You may have noticed that if you click on the script text the video will start playing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may have noticed that if you click on the script text, the video will start playing
```

> at that specific moment. We manage to do so by synchronizing word by word the script 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at that specific moment. We manage to do that by synchronizing the script and video subtitle word-by-word, giving us the ability to know *when* each word in the script occurs.
```

> with the subtitles, so it's very important to keep both files as similar as possible. This

Reviewer: I think you might need to first discuss that, to translate to Spanish, we have to translate both the "script" AND the "subtitles file" (maybe even give a short example of the subtitle file). Then the rest will make more sense.

turned out to be a problem because we generate the Spanish subtitles from the output

> of an AI algorithm (which is not always idempotent). So, what we do is to run this script-clicking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of an AI algorithm, which sometimes translates the script and identical subtitles content *slightly* differently. These slight differences break the script script-clicking feature! Fortunately, this is rare. And if the script-clicking feature fails on the translated subtitles, we send an alert to one of the trusty folks at Symfonycasts to fix it. Unfortunately, this is still a small, manual process.
```

on the translated subtitles, and in case of an error, we send an alert so someone from the staff
can fix it, unfortunately this latter step is still a manual process.

## The `StofDoctrineExtensionsBundle` comes in to play

> One thing is to accurately translate a tutorial but delivering a multi-language site

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's one thing to accurately translate a tutorial, but delivering a multi-language site is quite...
```

> it's quite a different thing to do. As you may have noticed we partially translated the site

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it's quite a different thing to do. As you may have noticed, we partially translated the site
```

> into Spanish, you will see Spanish content only on those tutorials that are translated. For this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
into Spanish: you will see Spanish content only on tutorials that are translated. For this
```

purpose we installed and configured the `StofDoctrineExtensionsBundle` bundle in the application. 
If you can learn more about the _translatable_ behavior [here](https://github.com/doctrine-extensions/DoctrineExtensions/blob/main/doc/translatable.md)

## Want to Help?

> Since this is a process run by machines, you'll notice some "misprints" or just... silly translations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since this is a process run by machines, you may notice some "misprints" or just... silly translations.
```

Machines haven't quite taken over the world yet. But that's ok because we've also delivered a way 

> where you can easily help improve or fix an error by sending a pull request to a public GitHub repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where you can easily help improve or fix an error by sending a pull request to public GitHub repositories.
```

We store translations in different repos, otherwise it sounds like we should link that exact republic repo :)

> You only need to click on the "Edit on GitHub" button which is at the right top corner of the script area, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply click the "Edit on GitHub" button which is at the right top corner of the script area, 
```

edit the script (or caption) file and commit the changes.

> Oh, and right now, we're focused only on translating content into Spanish, but we may expand 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oh, and right now, we're focused only on translating content into Spanish. We may expand to other languages in the future, but not immediately.
```

> in the future to other languages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to other languages in the future.
```

Author: Honestly I don't know what option is better. I'll let Ryan to decide it :)

Reviewer 2: I believe it's "more correct" grammatically, it's the same as "today/yesterday", i.e. means a point in time - you usually put it at the very end of the sentence, or in the very beginning :)

Author: Fair enough!

> Thank you for reading! And I hope you will find this helpful.

Reviewer: I'd just finish with:

Have fun!
